Database sharding blog (#144)
xataio/mdx-blog: database-sharding.mdx

---
title: 'What is horizontal sharding?'
description: 'A basic overview of horizontal sharding. What is it and what are the challenges?'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/database-sharding-min.png
  alt: Quick read on horizontal sharding
author: J Edwards
date: 11-23-2023
published: true
slug: xatabyte-horizontal-sharding
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/database-sharding-twitter-og-min.png
---

> > Want to grasp a complex concept in the time it takes to brew your morning coffee? In our **XataByte: 3-minute byte-sized read** series we offer concise explanations to help you unravel intricate database concepts without the time commitment. Today we are looking at **horizontal sharding**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Want to grasp a complex concept in the time it takes to brew your morning coffee? In our **XataByte: 5-minute byte-sized read** series we offer concise explanations to help you unravel intricate database concepts without the time commitment. Today we are looking at **horizontal sharding**.
```

The article has robust content and is definitely not a 3-minute read! 5 minute is also pushing it but I think it makes makes the point without overpromising on how short it is :)

| **Backup and disaster recovery**         | Implementing comprehensive backup solutions and quick disaster recovery strategies for each shard is crucial for data safety. This ensures minimal downtime in case of system failures.                              |
| **Resource planning**                    | Efficient allocation and management of resources are key. Utilizing cloud services can offer additional flexibility and scalability for resource management.                                                         |
| **Security**                             | Strong security measures, including data encryption and rigorous access controls, should be implemented at the shard level to protect sensitive information.                                                         |

And there we go – a basic rundown of horizontal sharding in databases. This overview touches just the tip of the iceberg, but it gives a fundamental insight into how horizontal sharding helps in managing large datasets more efficiently.

> Let us know what you think. We have a lot more to say on the topic, so reach out to us on [Discord](https://discord.com/invite/kvAcQKh7vm) or follow us on [X | Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata). We'd love to hear your thoughts, answer your questions, and keep you updated on the latest at Xata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us know what you think. We have a lot more to say on the topic, so reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or follow us on [X | Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata). We'd love to hear your thoughts, answer your questions, and keep you updated on the latest at Xata.
```
